# Quick Tutorial on Internationalization

MIOLO uses gettext to provide internationalization for modules and programs. Because of this, it is essential that PHP has been compiled with the `--with-gettext` option.

## Translation File Types

To create a translation, you need to know that there are two types of files, `.po` and `.mo`:

- **`.po`** (Portable Object): These are the translation source files. In these files, `msgid` entries identify the strings to be translated and `msgstr` entries contain the corresponding translations.
- **`.mo`** (Machine Object): These are the binary files used by gettext to look up translations. These files are generated by running the `msgfmt` command.

### Example

Suppose there is a module called `abcde`. For this module, there must be a file `abcde.po` containing the identification and respective translations of the strings. To generate the binary `.mo` catalog, run the `msgfmt` command as follows:

```bash
msgfmt -f abcde.po -o abcde.mo
```

## Translation in MIOLO

First of all, the `miolo.conf` file must specify the language to be used and the path where the translation files are located.

To access translated strings, use the MIOLO function `_M("string", "module")`, where `"string"` identifies the string to be located and translated, and `"module"` indicates the file containing the translation.

Using our previous example, suppose that in a certain file of the `abcde` module there is a string called `"hoje"` (Portuguese for "today") that needs to be translated to other languages. To do this, use the function as follows:

```php
_M("hoje", "abcde")
```

## Location of Translation Files

As mentioned above, MIOLO uses the `abcde.mo` file to locate translations for the `abcde` module/program.

**Question:** How to handle translations for multiple languages?

**Answer:** Following the Linux standard, all translation files in MIOLO are placed in subdirectories of the `locale/` directory. These subdirectories identify the language names where the respective translation files will be found. This means you could also use `/usr/share/locale` to store translation files, as long as it is configured accordingly in `miolo.conf`.

Assuming the `abcde` module was written in English and has translations for Brazilian Portuguese and French, the directory structure would look like:

```
locale/
├── pt_BR/
│   └── LC_MESSAGES/
│       └── abcde.mo
└── fr/
    └── LC_MESSAGES/
        └── abcde.mo
```

The configuration in `miolo.conf`, assuming you want to use the Brazilian Portuguese translation, would be:

```php
$MIOLOCONF['i18n']['locale']   = '/usr/local/miolo/locale';
$MIOLOCONF['i18n']['language'] = 'pt_BR';
```

Since version 1.0-RC5, this configuration can also be included in the module's `module.conf` file.

---

*Author: Vilson Cristiano Gartner (vgartner@univates.br)*
